{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf949
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh8400\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 It's was a good year for Perl, and I go through the highlights in "The Year In Perl, 2007"\
Mark Schoonover's article,  "Expecting Perl", reminds of the days when I first started using Perl because I was programming in Tcl/Tk too. Part of the fun of Tcl was the Expect library that let me pretend to interact with other computers in real-time while I was actually sleeping, or even doing anything else. If my boss wanted to micro-manage by watching the login logs, I should at least make it a challenge for him. Now Mark demonstrates the same thing from Perl, although he's using it to get real work done. He's logging into and managing hundreds of machines by running a single script.\
In "Compiling My Own perl", I go through the steps I use to try out a different version of Perl without disturbing what I already have. Perl has been so popular that many people don't ever have to compile their own. It's not hard to do, and the documentation that comes with each distribution explains it all, but I digest that and apply it to installing it as a normal user without any help from your over-worked system administrator.\
Johan Lodin explains Perl's closures in "Far More Than I Ever Wanted To Know About Closures". Anonymous subroutines can have private, persistent data, even without using Perl 5.10's new state feature. Johan shows how to create and use closures, but also shows the common mistakes people make creating them and how to avoid those.\
The Halting Problem is a famous one in computer science. Alan Turing says that we can't find a general solution to determining whether a program will ever stop running. It's a big pile of math, but Jeffery Kegler goes through it in Perl with his Acme::Halt module. This Halting Problem has implications for PPI, Adam Kennedy's static Perl parser.}