{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf102
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Oblique;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww10700\viewh11860\viewkind0
\pard\tx720\tx1440\tx2160\tx2880\tx3600\tx4320\tx5040\tx5760\tx6480\tx7200\tx7920\tx8640\ql\qnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 PUBLISHERS PAGE\
\
The second issue of the print version of 
\f1\i The Perl Review
\f0\i0  is a big jump over the first: I'm not doing the design (thank god for me and the you), the cover looks more like a "real magazine" thanks to Eric Maki, who used his POD to RTF converter to get things into the final layout.   Even though the end result is in an open source tool, the path to it still mostly open source tools.\
\
A lot of things have happened behind-the-scenes on the business underpinnings.    We now do our own credit card processing using Business::OnlinePayment::AuthorizeNet, and accept MasterCard, Visa, and American Express.  You can still pay through PayPal and lots of other options if you really want to.  We're not rolling in money, but we are paying the bills.  The next big step is a European edition that will cut the subscription rates to be comparable to those in the US.  We're looking at that for the next issue.\
\
We also got out of the blogging business.  We wanted to add those to our website (http://www.theperlreview.com), but we're here to publish a magazine, not administer systems and software.  So, we set up some discussion forums on LiveJournal (another heavy Perl user) and have some RSS feeds: our website has all the details.  We don't want to reinvent the wheel and we want to focus on producing great content, so look for us to use more existing services to pull things together.\
\
We're also getting more organized with the content.  We rushed to get the first issue printed in time for the Open Source Convention, and we've had time to breathe since then.  Dave Adler, one of the charter members of Perl Mongers (he was there when I came up with the idea) starts a column on PM happenings.  Jeff Bisbee of The Perl Foundation starts a column about what's happening there.  We're still looking for other column ideas too.  If you want to write for The Perl Review, let us know!\
\
It's almost too bad that this issue is print.  When we published PDF-only versions, we could have as many pages as we liked, and we could change that anytime we liked.  Frank Antonsen's article on functional programming in Perl started as an almost definitive work on the subject, and it was really good stuff:  we just didn't have the space it all.    The articles by Alberto Manuel Brandao Sim\'9bes ("Down translating XML") and Zach Thompson ("Faking stored procedures") also had a lot of great stuff that we had to cut for space.  Next time we'll plan for more pages.\
\
And finally, happy birthday to Perl, DBI, and Randal Schwartz.  See our Perl Calendar section on page XXX for details.\
\
\
brian d foy, <comdog@panix.com>}