{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf102
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Arial-Black;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Arial-ItalicMT;\f2\fswiss\fcharset77 ArialMT;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww9000\viewh9000\viewkind0
\deftab720
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl260\sb270\qj

\f0\b\fs28 \cf0 Perl Foundation News\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl260\qj

\f1\i\b0\fs22 \cf0 by Allison Randal, allison@perl.org\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl260\qj

\f2\i0 \cf0 \
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl260\sb90\qj
\cf0 The Perl Foundation would like some feedback from companies that use Perl every day to find out what you need from Perl 5, Perl 6, and the migration process between the two.\
We would also like some funding to speed up key areas of Perl 5, Perl 6, and Parrot development. We value input from everyone who uses Perl, but for this exercise we want to spend some intensely focused time with a small group of companies. So how do we choose? Which companies have something valuable to say? \
It\'d5s impossible to tell. But if a company depends on Perl enough that they\'d5ll invest in it as an investment in their own future, it\'d5s a pretty safe bet that we need to hear what they have to say.\
So, we\'d5re forming an advisory board of sponsors. The first meeting will be in January. Sponsors over a certain threshold (probably no more than 15 companies) will join in open group discussions centering around our current plans for the next few years and how we can meet your needs better.\
Sponsors over a higher threshold (probably around 4-5 companies) will each get a block of time to tell the group how they use Perl now, how they plan to use it in the future, and how we can help them do it.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl260\qj
\cf0 What could you do with an hour of Larry\'d5s undivided attention?\
Drop me an email if you\'d5re interested. A project plan on how we intend to use the funding is available. And, if you\'d5re not the right person respond to this, feel free to pass it along.\
\pard\pardeftab720\ri720\sl260\sb90\qj

\f1\i \cf0 Allison Randal is the president of The Perl Foundation. Founded in 2000, The Perl Foundation (TPF) is a non-profit  501(c)(3) corporation established to advance the use and  development of the Perl programming language.  to get more information go to http://www.perlfoundation.org
\f2\i0 \
}